---
order: 30
title: General Theory of Relativity
description: Einstein's study of gravitation
slug: /balance/relativity
icon: balance
image: /jpg/balance.jpg
---
## General Relativity, 

Really just the name for Einstein's study of gravitation. And here we're going to introduce my all-time favorite analogy for general relativity, the bowling ball on the trampoline. Let's imagine that four-dimensional spacetime is the trampoline stretched out flat. What Einstein did to study gravitation was to see what happened to spacetime when you introduce the presence of mass, or for this example, a bowling ball. 



The bowling ball causes the trampoline to dip down, right? And then if you flick a marble on the trampoline, it's very easy to make the marble orbit the bowling ball, just as planets go around the sun. So essentially, general relativity introduces the presence of mass to spacetime, and that mass tells spacetime how to curve, and then the curvature tells other mass how to move. Remember the problem with Mercury? That precessing orbit that couldn't be explained by just Newtonian gravity? Well you might be able to even replicate this yourself using different trajectories with the marble to orbit the bowling ball on the trampoline. It's not difficult to make the marble's orbit precess, or trace out a flower shape. When Einstein applied his general relativity equations, referred to as Einstein's field equations, to the orbit of Mercury, he was able to get the orbit to precess without needing any external masses or influences that haven't been observed, like the planet Vulcan. As the story goes, he was so thrilled with this result that he treated himself to three days off work. I don't know about you, but if I had just solved a fundamental question in physics, I would have taken at least a week. While Einstein's gravitational field equations solved the problem of Mercury's precessing orbit, that was not enough for scientists to radically turn away from Newtonian gravity, treating gravity as a force, toward a new way of seeing gravity as the curvature of our universe due to the presence of mass. They needed more evidence. And it was a solar eclipse that gave them just that. To see how, let's go back to the idea of the bowling ball on a trampoline. But instead of putting a marble in orbit, let's flick it all the way across the trampoline, from one side to the other. If you do that, you'll observe that the marble takes a curved path. The marble is so small compared to a bowling ball that it barely makes any dent in the trampoline itself, and therefore will just want to travel in a straight line. But because the trampoline is curved, the marble's path will curve as well, and you won't be able to just flick it to someone directly across from you. This is comparable to something air travelers experience every day. If you've ever looked at flight paths across the Earth, you may have noticed that they don't seem to take the most direct route. For example, if you're flying from London to Los Angeles, you'll spend a lot more time in Canada than you think before heading south into the United States. Well, as it turns out, because the Earth is a sphere, these flight patterns are actually the shortest path. It's just not intuitive for us, especially when we're looking at a flattened map of the Earth. So let's go back to the marble coasting across a trampoline with a bowling ball on it. We'll come back to the implications of lighter objects bending the trampoline less, but for now the important thing is to think about the marble as if it were a particle of light. This comparison was not lost on scientists as they began to think about ways that they could test this new theory of gravity. Since Einstein had already established that light behaves as both a wave and a particle, they realized that particles of light would behave like our marble. They would curve around a presence of mass, especially one as massive as the Sun. As the Earth goes around the Sun, the Sun will be blocking out different background stars during the year. Basically, we see different constellations at different times throughout the year. Fun fact, actually, this is where the zodiac comes from. All those star signs like Capricorn, Gemini, Aquarius, all correspond to a particular constellation, but they aren't just randomly chosen from the sky, they're actually the constellations that the Sun is blocking at that time of year. So in February, when these signs were first established, the Sun was between us and the Aquarius constellation. At other parts of the year, you would be able to see the Aquarius constellation because the Sun would be between us and another pattern of stars. Oh, but wait, it's time for another Well Actually moment. Well, actually, that was true when the zodiac signs were first established, but the Earth is on a slight tilt of about 23 degrees. This means that it wobbles like a top, and that wobble makes a full circle once every 4,000 years. So it's hardly noticeable in one person's lifetime, but it's been long enough since the zodiacs were established that the position is almost one full zodiac sign off. Of course, I don't think that would stop the crew of the Battlestar Galactica from declaring that they've just discovered Earth, but it's just a fun fact where history and astronomy interact. Anyway, getting back to what we were discussing. Because we can carefully observe constellations when the Sun is not blocking their path, we know what position the stars should be in when the Sun is keeping us from seeing them. However, according to Einstein, the light from the stars would be slightly curved around the Sun and to us would appear in a different position. Once again, imagine flicking that marble at your friend. If they caught it, but were unable to see where you were standing, they might think you're in a different position than where you actually are because they'll trace that marble directly back in a straight line to the other side of the trampoline. This light-bending phenomenon is now known as gravitational lensing, but in Einstein's day it was only a prediction, his prediction. And scientists thought that checking the light coming from stars blocked by the Sun would be a great first big test of Einstein's general relativity. However, the Sun is a problem. You probably remember being told from a very young age not to look at the Sun. It emits so much light during the daytime, which energy spreads through our atmosphere and keeps us from seeing any stars, let alone the ones right behind it. However, occasionally the universe likes us and throws us a treat. In this case, it was in the form of a total solar eclipse. A total solar eclipse happens when the Moon completely moves between us and the Sun, blocking the light for a short period of time. This allows us to observe things we otherwise couldn't due to the Sun's brightness. Because the Moon is much smaller than the Earth and far enough away, it doesn't cast the entire surface of the Earth in shadow, but rather a small portion of it. And that shadow makes its way across the Earth in a small line. If you're lucky enough to be near the line, or can travel to it, then you can experience the phenomenon of daylight disappearing during a solar eclipse. Because the motion of objects in our solar system are so well mapped out, we're able to predict when a solar eclipse will happen and where the shadow will fall. Another fun side fact is that a battle coinciding with a solar eclipse gives us what may be the earliest exact date of a historical event. When we're looking back thousands of years, notable events are hard to pin down to a specific date. However, because total solar eclipses are so rare and confined to small areas of the globe when they do happen, it's easy to know exactly when they occurred. On May 28, 585 BC, the Medes and the Lydians squared off in the latest battle of a war that had been going on for six years. According to the Greek historian Herodotus, as they were fighting, the sky turned dark and it suddenly seemed like night. This was an unknown occurrence and obviously scared the willies out of a lot of the combatants. So much so that they saw it as a sign and laid down their weapons and signed a treaty right there. Now, many facts surrounding the account of this battle are disputed, but we do know that there was an eclipse in Turkey that happened on May 28 in 585 BC. So if the surrounding information is true in terms of who was there and the description of what happened was accurate, this event is pinned to this exact date. Just an awesome fun story about eclipses. Anyway, Einstein predicted this phenomenon of light curving around spacetime in 1915 and it was known that there would be a solar eclipse in 1919. Astronomers saw this as an opportunity to map out the stars behind the sun while the moon was blocking the light, to see if the stars appeared to be in positions where we wouldn't expect them. The sun at the time was blocking the constellation Taurus and the eclipse shadow would travel through the southern hemisphere. So there were two expeditions sent out to perform this experiment. One team went to an island off the coast of Africa and one team went to Brazil. The team near Africa included Sir Frank Dyson and Sir Arthur Eddington, both renowned scientists. Sir Eddington indeed noticed a change in position of the stars and presented this research to the Royal Society of London. Both of the team's results were accepted and as a result Einstein's predictions were confirmed. This was the first big win for general relativity. We use gravitational lensing these days for all sorts of research. It is especially used to detect dark matter. We don't know what dark matter is, but we do see that galaxies and clusters of galaxies behave as if there's a lot more stuff there than we can detect. And when I say a lot, I mean about five times more stuff. The issue is it doesn't interact with light at all. It doesn't block light or absorb or reflect it. All we see are its gravitational effects due to observing orbits and the lensing of background stars. One of the most famous examples of this is the bullet cluster, where we can see two galaxy clusters that have collided. And by measuring the light being bent around in multiple directions, we can figure out how much matter is there. And much of it is dark. This was used to a brilliant effect in Star Trek Discovery Season 1. In it, they are trying to figure out a way of detecting cloaked Klingon ships.